A Monument to Waste
On the western shore of Staten Island, one of the five boroughs of New York City, sit four colossal heaps of garbage. The trash piles are so tall that they rival the highest points on the Atlantic seaboard. Fresh Kills Landfill, where New Yorkers deposited their trash for more than 50 years, finally closed in March 2001. Fifty years' worth of garbage is spread out over almost 3,000 acres. Twenty-five Yankee Stadiums fit into this land area, and there were widespread reports that like the Great Wall of China, the landfill was visible from space.

Originally opened in 1948, the landfill was only meant to be active for two years. But by 1952, the city had extended its permit to continue dumping garbage there for another eight years, and in 1959 the permit was extended for another 15. By 1965, the city had refused to set a closing date because there were no alternate dumping sites available. Staten Islanders were outraged to have their borough used as the city's dumping ground.

Until quite recently, city officials had insisted that there was enough dumping space left in Fresh Kills to last until 2010. However, the citizens of Staten Island had other ideas. In the late 1990's, local political forces were finally aligned to address the issue of closing Fresh Kills for good by the end of 2001. Although the landfill officially closed on March 23, 2001, one of the mounds was re-opened to accept rubble and debris from the World Trade Center disaster. 

While it was still operating, Fresh Kills accepted garbage 24 hours a day, six days a week. Thirteen thousand tons per day of solid waste were brought to the dump in barges, and trucks delivered another 1,500 tons per day. All this resulted in four stinking, rotting mounds of trash that reached higher than a 20-story building in some spots. Cranes unloaded the waste at the top of the piles, spreading it in layers, compacting it with special equipment, then covering it with a thin layer of dirt.

Noxious fumes from the dump were a constant nuisance, especially during the summer. Hundreds of thousands of seagulls continually hovered over the area. Plastic bags blew off the mounds and got caught in surrounding trees. At one point, officials feared that one of the landfill's slopes would collapse, which would have sent an avalanche of rotting garbage onto a nearby expressway. Few people could have convincingly argued to keep the dump open.

The main reason it stayed open as long as it did was the lack of viable alternatives. Actual closure of the landfill was not a simple issue by any stretch of the imagination. The biggest question was what to do with the tens of thousands of pounds of garbage that New York City households continued to generate on a daily basis. For now, the city is exporting its garbage, most of it to landfills in Pennsylvania, Ohio and Virginia. 

In the meantime, the four mountains of waste that make up the Fresh Kills Landfill behave like living, breathing organisms. As bacteria consume the several hundred million tons of organic matter, the Fresh Kills mounds will continue to digest the garbage for decades, while simultaneously settling and expelling both liquid and gaseous wastes. 

City officials devised solutions to deal with the millions of pounds of methane gas produced by the landfill's bacteria. These solutions include mining and processing the gas into natural gas that can be used to heat as many as 14,000 homes in the area.

Despite its trashy recent history, Fresh Kills contains within its 2,800-acre boundary intact wetlands and wildlife habitats of tremendous natural beauty. 
After the landfill officially closed in 2001, the city of New York sponsored an international design contest to create an innovative new use for the location. The idea was to transform the site into a world-class recreational area. The competition winners, a design team from Philadelphia, created a proposal that would set aside recovered areas of Fresh Kills for leisure activities such as art exhibitions, hiking, biking, bird-watching and more. The remainder of the area would
Additionally, an ecology team from Rutgers University headed up an effort to plant a forest over the area. Much of the garbage has been sealed with tough clay or a plastic membrane, and then covered with topsoil and grass. The Rutgers team planted trees, shrubs and flowers in an effort to determine if native vegetation can flourish in the layer of soil coating the 150 million tons of garbage.
So far, the planting efforts have shown promising results. The wooded environment in Fresh Kills provides a natural oasis for birds, insects and other animals. Birds encourage further reforestation, by bringing in seeds from other areas. The ultimate goal is to expand the reforestation process, while also monitoring and weeding the environment to keep out invasive species.

Early Dutch settlers named the area Fresh Kills, which means fresh streams. It was once a beautiful meadow and now it will be beautiful again.

